TITLE: Effect
of Quantitative Structural Properties and Drug
Formulation in Four Cannabinoids (Cannabidiol, Cannabigerol, Cannabichromene,
and Cannabinol) on Their Lymphatic Transport after Enteral Administration
in Rats

Lymphatic transport of
drugs after oral administration plays an
important role in the absorption of highly lipophilic compounds with
log P > 5. − After solubilization in the gastrointestinal tract, these compounds
are absorbed into enterocytes, the intestinal epithelial cells, where
they are incorporated into chylomicrons. Chylomicrons are large lipoprotein
particles produced specifically in the intestines that are naturally
involved in the transport of highly lipophilic molecules. Their size/diameter
is too large to pass into the intestinal blood capillaries. Therefore,
they take an alternative route via the intestinal lymphatic system.
Chylomicrons enter the lacteals (lymph capillaries) and are transported
through a network of lymphatic vessels and mesenteric lymph nodes
until they reach the thoracic duct, where intestinal lymph mixes with
lymph from the lower parts of the body. All the lymph eventually enters
the systemic blood circulation at the confluence of the thoracic duct
with the jugular and subclavian veins.

The transport through
the intestinal lymphatic system can have
a major impact on the drug pharmacokinetics. It can increase the absolute
oral bioavailability because the lymph represents an additional gateway
into the systemic circulation besides the standard transport through
the portal vein. Another mechanism for increasing oral bioavailability
is by avoiding first-pass metabolism in the liver. Mesenteric lymph
is a dominant (sometimes even exclusive) source of systemically available
drug for compounds with a high extraction ratio in the liver. , Lymphatic transport can improve the efficacy of drugs that act against
components of the lymphatic system, such as immunosuppressants, anti-HIV
and anticancer drugs by reaching high exposure in the mesenteric lymphatic
system. ,

Given the possible advantages of targeting
drugs into the mesenteric
lymph, various approaches have been tested to increase lymphatic transport.
However, summarizing all the available literature on in vivo lymphatic
transport data, it seems that different strategies must be implemented
based on the drug’s lipophilicity. In highly lipophilic compounds
(log P > 5), it may be sufficient to use a lipid-based drug
formulation (oil solution, o/w emulsion, self-nanoemulsifying system,
etc.), because lipids (especially long-chain triglycerides) promote
the physiological assembly of chylomicrons in which the drugs are
dissolved and transported through the lymph. , Targeting
drugs with lower lipophilicity (log P < 5) into the mesenteric
lymph is much more challenging. The only functional technique discovered
so far is a synthesis of a lipophilic prodrug by covalently binding
a lipid residue to the original drug molecule. Such complex molecule
has log P > 5 and is effectively transported into the lymph.
Examples of drugs successfully targeted into the lymph despite their
insufficient lipophilicity are e.g. mycophenolate, valproate, and
paracetamol. − There are few reports on targeting low-lipophilicity
drugs into the lymph without lipophilic prodrug synthesis. However,
the extent of the lymphatic transport for these compounds has been
investigated using a noninvasive lymphatic transport measurement,
which has been shown to significantly overestimate the results. −

Cannabinoids are an important group of compounds found naturally
in cannabis or produced synthetically and frequently used as registered
medicines, nutritional supplements or abused as recreational drugs.
They are lipophilic, mostly with log P > 5, and are therefore
suitable model drugs for lymphatic transport driven absorption. The
most frequently investigated cannabinoids are THC (tetrahydrocannabinol),
the main psychoactive compound in cannabis, and CBD (cannabidiol),
the second most abundant but nonpsychoactive cannabinoid. Besides
these two, there is a variety of “minor” cannabinoids
with much less pharmacological data available. In this work, we focus
on four nonpsychoactive compounds: the “major” cannabinoid
CBD, and three “minor” cannabinoids CBG (cannabigerol),
CBC (cannabichromene), and CBN (cannabinol). Their structures are
shown in Figure .

Structures
of the four tested cannabinoids: cannabidiol (CBD),
cannabigerol (CBG), cannabichromene (CBC), and cannabinol (CBN)

CBD has been registered for the treatment of specific
forms of
childhood epilepsy. It is administered orally in a formulation based
on sesame oil solution (Epidyolex). Besides that, CBD, together with
THC, are the active components of authorized cannabis extract registered
for the treatment of spasticity in patients with multiple sclerosis
(Sativex). CBD has a very limited oral bioavailability, estimated
at <10% in man. When taken with food,
the bioavailability increases up to 4-fold. Preclinical pharmacokinetic data are consistent with the human observations:
CBD had a bioavailability of 8% and 22% in rats when administered
in a lipid-free formulation and in a long-chain triglycerides-based
formulation, respectively.

CBG
is a much less known cannabinoid compared to CBD. There are
no registered drug products containing this compound worldwide. Nevertheless,
it is marketed as a nutritional supplement and various pharmacological
effects have been reported in preclinical studies. CBG possesses antioxidant,
anti-inflammatory, and antitumoral activities, and has antianxiety,
neuroprotective and appetite-stimulating effects. Absolute oral bioavailability is not known. When administered
to dogs, CBG was rapidly absorbed with an average T max of
0.75 h. When coadministered with food,
the speed and extent of absorption did not change significantly.

CBC has shown an anti-inflammatory and antihypertensive effect
in preclinical studies. , After oral administration
to man, it absorbs with moderate speed (T max 2–4
h). Absolute oral bioavailability is not known.

CBN was successfully tested in the treatment of dermatological
disease epidermolysis bulosa. After oral
administration to rats, it was absorbed with T max of 1.5
to 3 h. Absolute oral bioavailability
was not determined.

One way of increasing the bioavailability
of lipophilic compounds
with problematic dissolution in the gastrointestinal tract is the
development of formulations where the active substance is dispersed
in small lipid droplets (microemulsions, nanoemulsions, self-emulsifying
systems etc.). This method was successfully used e.g. in ivacaftor,
where the bioavailability was increased 7-fold in Beagle dogs and
previously present positive food effect was eliminated. There are discussions, whether this bioavailability
increase is solely due to better solubilization of the active substance
in the gastrointestinal tract, or if there are some additional mechanisms
like e.g. involvement of the intestinal lymphatic transport. Unfortunately,
there are only very few studies comparing the lymphatic transport
of one particular compound administered in a basic formulation (aqueous
or oil solution) and in an advanced formulation containing a solubilized
drug. In our recently published preliminary
data, the CBD oral bioavailability did increase mainly due to increased
nonlymphatic transport when administered as a microemulsion compared
to a simple oil solution.

There
are specific physicochemical properties and molecular structure
characteristics that help the drugs partition into the lymph after
intestinal absorption. The role of log P has been postulated already
several decades ago by Charman and Stella. The same authors also discussed the importance of compound solubility
in long-chain triglycerides. However, at least one molecule was later
found (penclomedine) with a very limited partitioning into lymph despite
high lipophilicity (log P > 5) and high solubility in long-chain
triglycerides (>50 mg/g). Moreover,
log
P was absent in the mathematical model developed by Holm and Hoest
predicting precise lymphatic transport of drugs that was based on
in vivo data from 19 molecules. Instead,
factors such as the size of the hydrophilic area in the molecule and
hydrophilic–lipophilic ratio did play a role in this model.
It is therefore evident that no single physicochemical property or
structural pattern can be used to precisely predict the extent of
lymphatic transport and the result is formed by an interplay of more
variables. Unfortunately, there is a lack of experimental data investigating
molecular structure characteristics like molecular size, molecular
shape, and surface polarity on the extent of lymphatic transport.

The aim of this study was to evaluate whether an advanced drug
formulation (a nanoemulsion) increases bioavailability via portal
blood or via lymphatic transport and to assess the importance of quantitative
structural properties of the molecule for the extent of lymphatic
transport. To achieve these aims, we investigated four similar compounds
CBD, CBG, CBC and CBN and their quantitative structure–activity
relationship (QSAR) with lymphatic transport after oral dosing in
a simple formulation (oil solution) and a nanoemulsion.

In the pharmacokinetic
and lymphatic transport studies, the cannabinoids CBD, CBG, CBC, CBN
(purchased from Pharmabinoid, Netherlands) were administered in sunflower
oil and nanoemulsion. The required amount of cannabinoid was dissolved
in sunflower oil of pharmaceutical quality (Fagron, Czech Republic)
to obtain a reference formulation. The composition of the nanoemulsion
formulation was optimized. In brief, a three-component system was
selectedpropylene glycol monocaprylate (PGMC; Gattefosse’,
France), Kolliphor EL (CR-EL; BASF, Germany) and the third component
acting as a cosurfactant and solubilizer was subject to optimization.
Diethylene glycol monoethyl ether (TRSC; Gattefosse’, France),
ethyl alcohol – 99.8% (ETOH; Penta, Czech Republic) or propylene
glycol – 99.5% (PRGL; Penta, Czech Republic) were tested as
cosurfactant and solubilizer. According to the optimization results
and literature research, TRSC was chosen for further in vivo experiments. Further information regarding optimization is shown
in the Supporting Information . The nanoemulsion
formulation used in the pharmacokinetic study for both the oral and
the intravenous administration was prepared as follows. Cannabinoid
was dissolved in the oil phase (50 wt % of CR-EL, 30 wt % of TRSC
and 20 wt % of PGMC). Next, four parts of water with respect to one
part of oil (by weight) were added dropwise to the oil mixture at
mild stirring. The final formulation was kept out of light and stored
in the fridge before application.

All animal experiments were
performed with approval from the Ministry of Education, Youth and
Sports, Czech Republic (MSMT-26838/2021-4). All efforts were made
to minimize animal suffering. Male Wistar rats (weight 300–450
g, age 3–5 months) were purchased from Velaz s. r. o., Prague,
Czech Republic. They were housed under standard conditions (12-h light/dark
cycle, 22 °C temperature, and 50% humidity) in cages with wood
shavings bedding (two rats per cage during acclimation, one rat per
cage during experiment) and fed on water and granulated diet ad libitum.
The acclimation period took at least 1 week. The animals were randomly
assigned to experimental groups.

Absolute
oral bioavailability and other pharmacokinetic parameters were determined
in a series of two-period, crossover studies, where the cannabinoids
were administered intravenously in the first period, and orally in
the second. Both jugular veins were cannulated (3 Fr polyurethane
catheter, Instech Laboratories, Plymouth Meeting, USA). One catheter
was used for intravenous dosing, and the second one was used for repetitive
blood sampling in order to avoid sampling cannula contamination with
highly concentrated intravenous drug solution. The anesthesia was
performed using a rapid inhalational induction with isoflurane (IsoFlo,
Zoetis, Czech Republic) followed by intramuscular injection of ketamine
100 mg/kg (Narkamon, Bioveta a.s., Czech Republic) and xylazine 5
mg/kg (Rometar, Bioveta a.s., Czech Republic). After a three-day recovery
period, the rats were intravenously dosed with the particular cannabinoid
(1 mg of CBD, 1.5 mg of the other three cannabinoids in the form of
nanoemulsion, volume 100 μL). Systemic blood (100 μL)
was drawn at 5, 15, and 30 min and at 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 24 h(s)
postdose. After a two-day wash-out period, the dosing via oral gavage
followed (10 mg of CBD, 15 mg of the other three cannabinoids in the
form of nanoemulsion, volume 1 mL). Systemic blood (100 μL)
was drawn at 0 (predose), 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, and 24 h(s).
Blood samples were centrifuged (4500 rpm for 10 min) and serum was
extracted and stored in −80 °C until analysis. The laboratory
was unaware of animal assignment to particular experimental groups
(laboratory blinding).

Anesthetized
mesenteric lymph duct cannulated rat model was used for the lymphatic
transport measurement as previously described with slight modifications. Briefly, rats were left on normal diet and given
1 mL of olive oil 1 h prior to the surgery to visualize the mesenteric
lymph (milky white color). They were anesthetized with intramuscular
xylazine 5 mg/kg and ketamine 100 mg/kg after a rapid isoflurane induction.
A transverse laparotomy was performed. The mesenteric duct was identified
cranially to superior mesenteric artery and cannulated with heparin
prefilled 0.91 mm O.D., 0.46 mm I.D. polyethylene catheter (Instech
Laboratories, Plymouth Meeting, USA). The catheter was fixed in place
with two to three drops of tissue adhesive (Histoacryl, B. Braun Surgical,
S.A., Spain). A duodenal catheter was also placed (polyethylene, 0.97
mm O.D., 0.58 mm I.D.) via a small duodenotomy and fixed with tissue
adhesive. The abdominal wall was sutured in two layers, with both
catheters leaving the abdominal cavity through the right flank. At
the end of the procedure, the right jugular vein was cannulated for
blood sampling.

The
rats were then placed on heated pads and covered with blankets to
prevent heat loss. Cannabinoids in oil solution or nanoemulsion were
then dosed slowly via duodenal catheter over 30 min. The administered
dose was 10 mg of CBD and 15 mg of CBG, CBC and CBN (volume 1 mL).
Whole lymph was collected in regularly changed Eppendorf tubes from
the time the dosing started. When the dosing was finished, continuous
hydration with normal saline at a rate of 3 mL/h intraduodenally followed
using an infusion pump (Perfusor compactplus, B. Braun Melsungen AG,
Germany). Anesthesia was maintained throughout the rest of the experiment
and additional ketamine intramuscular boluses were given whenever
necessary. Eppendorf tubes were changed hourly and systemic blood
was drawn at the same time points. Blood samples were centrifuged
(4500 rpm for 10 min) and serum was extracted. Lymph volume was measured
gravimetrically and the samples were further processed without additional
adjustment. All samples were stored in −80 °C until analysis.
Laboratory was unaware of animal assignment to the particular experimental
groups (laboratory blinding).

The concentrations of
the cannabinoids under study, namely CBD, CBG, CBC and CBN were determined
in both serum and lymph samples. An ultrahigh performance liquid chromatography-tandem
mass spectrometric (UHPLC-MS/MS) method was developed for the quantification
of each cannabinoid, employing an isotopically labeled internal standard
(IS). The samples underwent identical processing procedures for each
cannabinoid: 80 μL of 100% acetonitrile containing 30 ng/mL
of an appropriate internal standard was added to 20 μL of the
sample. After vortexing and centrifugation at 10000 × g for 8
min, 60 μL of the supernatant was transferred into an LC vial.
For the UHPLC-MS/MS analysis, the Shimadzu UHPLC Nexera X3 coupled
with a Triple Quad 8045 tandem mass spectrometer (Shimadzu, Kyoto,
Japan) was used. Chromatographic analysis was performed on a Poroshell
120 EC-C18 column (50 × 2.1 mm; 1.9 μm; Agilent Technologies,
Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA). The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic
acid in deionized water (Solvent A) and methanol with 0.1% formic
acid (Solvent B). The flow rate of the mobile phase was maintained
at 0.4 mL/min, except for the CBC determination method, which had
a flow rate of 0.45 mL/min. The injection volume was 2 μL. The
temperature of the column was kept at 40 °C and samples were
thermostated at 10 °C. The optimized gradient elution proceeded
as follows for each cannabinoid: CBD (min/% B): 0/50, 0.5/50, 2.5/90,
3.5/90, 4.0/50, and 5.5/50; CBG (min/% B): 0/50, 0.5/50, 2.5/90, 4.0/90,
4.5/50, and 7.0/50; CBC and CBN (min/% B): 0/40, 0.5/40, 2.5/90, 4.0/90,
4.5/40, and 7.0/40. The MS/MS spectrometer was operated in a positive
mode. The applied conditions of the electrospray ion source were:
nebulizing gas flow: 3 L/min, heating gas flow: 10 L/min, interface
temperature: 300 °C, desolvation line temperature: 250 °C,
heat block temperature: 400 °C, and drying gas flow: 10 L/min.
The MS/MS measurement was performed in multiple reaction-monitoring
mode (MRM). MRM transitions of 315.2 > 193.1 (Q1 prebias −16
V, Q3 prebias −20 V and collision energy −22 V) and
318.2 > 196.1 (Q1 prebias −16 V, Q3 prebias −22 V
and
collision energy −35 V) were monitored for CBD and CBD-d3,
respectively. MRM transitions of 315.5 > 193.2 (Q1 prebias −13
V, Q3 prebias −20 V and collision energy −20 V) and
324.4 > 202.2 (Q1 prebias −17 V, Q3 prebias −21 V
and
collision energy −20 V) were monitored for CBC and CBC-d9,
respectively. MRM transitions of 317.2 > 193.2 (Q1 prebias −15
V, Q3 prebias −20 V and collision energy −19 V) and
326.3 > 202.2 (Q1 prebias −16 V, Q3 prebias −21 V
and
collision energy −18 V) were monitored for CBG and CBG-d9,
respectively. MRM transitions of 311.3 > 223.2 (Q1 prebias −17
V, Q3 prebias −21 V and collision energy −21 V) and
314.3 > 223.2 (Q1 prebias −17 V, Q3 prebias −24 V
and
collision energy −22 V) were monitored for CBN and CBN-d3,
respectively.

The calibration curves were constructed in each
blank matrix (serum and lymph) with seven concentrations by plotting
the ratio of the peak area of cannabinoid to that of IS against cannabinoid
concentration. The weighted least-squares linear regression method
was used with a weighting factor of 1/x2, which improved the accuracy
in low concentrations. The methods were linear (coefficients of determination
(R2) higher than 0.9995) in the concentration ranges of 1–1000
ng/mL for CBD, and 2.5–1250 ng/mL for CBG, CBC, and CBN. The
methods were validated according to the requirements of the European
Medicines Agency (EMA) Guideline on bioanalytical method validation
in terms of linearity, lower limit of quantification (LLOQ), upper
limit of quantification (ULOQ), accuracy, precision, selectivity,
recovery, carry-over effect, matrix effects, robustness, dilution
integrity, and stability of quality control (QC), and have been demonstrated
to be suitable for their intended purpose. All validation parameters met the acceptance criteria defined in
the EMA guideline.

There are
only calculated log P values available for CBD, CBG, CBC and CBN (range
6.1–7.4). Therefore, log P was measured experimentally for
all four cannabinoids during this study. The partition coefficient
describes the distribution of a tested compound in a two-phase octanol–water
system. It is defined as a ratio of concentrations of the un-ionized
compound in octanol and water at equilibrium. Cannabinoids were weighed
(2 mg) and dissolved in 2.5 mL of octanol, followed by the addition
of 2.5 mL of deionized water. The mixture was shaken for 2 h and then
allowed to separate for 24 h. Twenty μL of the aqueous (bottom)
phase was transferred into an LC vial, diluted with 60 μL of
an appropriate IS at a concentration of 30 ng/mL, and analyzed using
the aforementioned UHPLC-MS/MS method. The experiment was repeated
five times for each cannabinoid.

First, an optimal, energy-minimized
conformation was obtained by
molecular mechanics modeling in the software Avogadro, version 1.2.0.n
(an open-source molecular builder and visualization tool). The force
field GAFF, which is optimized for drug molecules, was used. The initial
conformations of the cannabinoids were obtained either from available
crystal structures (CBD and CBG) or generated using SMILES descriptors
(CBC and CBN). The size of the molecules was calculated as the smallest,
medium, and largest orthogonal dimensions in Å (10 –10 m) using the software rPluto, version 5.26 (The Cambridge Crystallographic
Data Centre, Cambridge, UK).

Serum
and lymph concentrations in all studies were dose-normalized to 1
mg/kg prior to further calculations. AUC values were determined using
linear trapezoidal rule. Exact actual sampling times were used for
this purpose. Scheduled sampling times were used for mean concentration
plotting in the graphs. PK-solver add-on for MS Excel was used for
all basic pharmacokinetic calculations. GraphPad Prism version 10.2.2 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA,
USA) was used for all statistical analyses and graph plotting. Unpaired
Student’s t test was used to compare pharmacokinetic
and lymphatic transport parameters between the experimental groups.
Level of significance was set to p < 0.05.

Lymphatic
transport parameters were defined and calculated as previously
described. , , Briefly, absolute
bioavailability via lymph (F AL ) was defined as percentage
of administered drug dose absorbed into the lymph. It was determined
directly from lymph volume and drug concentration in lymph duct cannulated
rats. Absolute bioavailability via portal vein (F AP ) was
analogically defined as percentage of administered drug dose reaching
the systemic circulation after direct absorption into blood. It was
calculated using equation 1 F AP = AUC ent / AUC iv where AUC ent is the area under
the dose-normalized blood concentration–time curve after enteral
dosing in lymph duct cannulated (i.e., lymph deprived) rats and AUC iv is the respective parameter in a separate intravenously
dosed group. Total absolute bioavailability (F) in lymph duct cannulated
rats was calculated as a sum of F AL and F AP .
In normal animals with no lymph duct cannulation, F was calculated
using standard formula for oral bioavailability: 2 F = AUC po / AUC iv Relative bioavailability via lymph (F RL ) was defined as the percentage of systemically available
drug that was absorbed via lymph. It was calculated using the equation 3 F RL = F AL / F

Pharmacokinetic
profiles for all four cannabinoids after oral and intravenous administration
are shown in Figure . The corresponding pharmacokinetic parameters are summarized in Table . The absolute oral
bioavailability varied significantly from 4.4% in CBG nanoemulsion
to as much as 52% in CBD oil solution. The bioavailability from the
oil solution and nanoemulsion did not differ significantly in the
particular cannabinoids with the exception of CBN, where the compound
achieved a higher systemic exposure when administered in an oil solution.
The drugs were absorbed at a low speed after oil solution administration
(T max of 4.9 to 6.8 h) and at a moderate speed after nanoemulsion
administration (T max of 2 to 3.5 h). The elimination was
quite fast in CBD, CBG and CBC with T 1/2 of 2 to 2.5 h after intravenous dosing, whereas the CBN elimination
was slower with T 1/2 of 5 h.

Mean ±
SD serum pharmacokinetic profiles of CBD, CBG, CBC,
and CBN after administration in the form of an oil solution (oral)
and nanoemulsion (oral and intravenous) to rats ( n = 5 to 8, see Table ). The administered dose was 10 mg of CBD and 15 mg of the other
cannabinoids in oral dosing (volume 1 mL) and 1 mg and 1.5 mg, respectively,
in intravenous dosing (volume 0.1 mL). All concentrations are dose-normalized
to 1 mg/kg. The missing 24 h time point after intravenous dosing is
due to absent sampling in CBD and due to all concentrations being
<LLOQ in CBC.

The administered
dose was 10
mg of CBD and 15 mg of the other cannabinoids in oral dosing (volume
1 mL). The intravenous doses were 1 mg of CBD and 1.5 mg of the other
cannabinoids (volume 0.1 mL). All concentrations and AUCs are dose-normalized
to 1 mg/kg. CBD intravenous data have already been published earlier. * marks a significant difference ( p < 0.05) between nanoemulsion and the corresponding oil solution.

The absolute oral bioavailability
of 52% and 45% in CBD oil solution
and nanoemulsion, respectively, ( Table ) exceeds significantly reports published so far (8.5%
for a lipid-free formulation, 14% for
sunflower oil, 22% for a long chain triglyceride-based
formulation and 25% for a sunflower oil-based
microemulsion). The reason may lie in
the extended time over which the pharmacokinetic profile was measured
in this study (24 h and extrapolated to infinity). The older studies
usually used a shorter period of measurement which may not have covered
the full pharmacokinetic profile and a significant portion of AUC
was not captured.

The absolute oral bioavailability was generally
very different
between the cannabinoids (Oil solution vs nanoemulsion: 52% vs 45%
for CBD, 12% vs 4% for CBG, 34% vs 18% for CBC, and 20% vs 9% for
CBN) despite their similar chemical properties and despite administration
in the same formulations. This indicates that the factors affecting
the amount of systemically available drug (intestinal absorption,
intestinal and liver first-pass metabolism, extent of lymphatic transport)
have to play varying roles in the particular compounds. In the lymphatic
transport studies, the extent of portally absorbed drug (F AP ) in the nanoemulsions did not differ significantly between the cannabinoids,
whereas the relative proportion of lymphatically absorbed drug (F RL ) was rather low in CBD and CBG (both 13%) and higher in
CBC and CBN (47% and 36%, respectively), see below. The situation
was different for the oil solutions, where the F AP in CBG
was lower compared to other cannabinoids, but the relative bioavailability
via lymph was very high (>50%) similarly in all four compounds.

Figure displays CBD, CBG, CBC and
CBN serum and lymph profiles and the corresponding cumulative lymphatic
transport after administration to anesthetized lymph duct-cannulated
rats. Table summarizes
all the lymphatic transport parameters. Administration of a nanoemulsion
led generally to an increased total absolute bioavailability compared
to oil solution. The bioavailability increase was due to both increased
direct absorption into portal blood and transport through lymphatic
vessels with the exception of CBD, where the lymphatic transport measured
as absolute bioavailability via lymph (F AL ) did not change
significantly. Interestingly, the absolute bioavailability via portal
vein increased more than the bioavailability via lymph in all four
cannabinoids. Whereas there was no increase, 8-fold, 3-fold, and 3-fold
increase in F AL for CBD, CBG, CBC and CBN, respectively,
there was an 11-fold, 71-fold, 8-fold and 13-fold increase in absolute
bioavailability via portal vein (F AP ) ( Table ). Consequently, the relative
bioavailability via lymph (F RL ) dropped by 74% in CBD,
75% in CBG and 48% in CBN in the nanoemulsion compared to oil solution.
The F RL decrease in CBC did not reach statistical significance
(p = 0.12). The reason for the higher bioavailability via portal vein
(F AP ) in all cannabinoids and higher bioavailability via
lymph (F AL ) in all cannabinoids but CBD for the nanoemulsion
compared to oil solution lies probably in a poor dispersion and digestion
of oil that was administered intraduodenally, skipping the dispersion
and digestion process in the stomach.

Mean ±
SD serum and lymph profiles and cumulative lymphatic
transport of CBD, CBG, CBC, and CBN after intraduodenal administration
to anesthetized lymph duct-cannulated rats in a form of nanoemulsion
(full circles) and oil solution (empty circles), n = 6 or 7; see Table . The administered dose was 10 mg of CBD and 15 mg of the other cannabinoids.
The administered volume was 1 mL. All concentrations are dose-normalized
to 1 mg/kg. F AL , absolute bioavailability via lymph.

The administered dose was 10
mg of CBD and 15 mg of the other cannabinoids. The administered volume
was 1 mL. All AUCs are dose-normalized to 1 mg/kg. * marks a significant
difference ( p < 0.05) between nanoemulsion and
the corresponding oil solution. F, total absolute bioavailability;
F AP , absolute bioavailability via portal vein; F AL , absolute bioavailability via lymph; F RL , relative bioavailability
via lymph.

As expected,
the lymphatic transport played a major role in the
general pharmacokinetics of all four cannabinoids tested. The relative
bioavailability via lymph (F RL ) of ≥50% seen after
administration of oil solutions counts the cannabinoids among compounds
with the highest lymphotropic potential, like vitamin D or halofantrine. ,

Due to the
highly lipophilic character of cannabinoids, their concentration in
the organic phase is several orders of magnitude higher than the concentration
in the aqueous phase. As a result, the difference in the total amount
of cannabinoids and the amount present in the organic phase is very
small and falls within the experimental error of the analytical method.
Therefore, log P values were calculated based on the measured cannabinoid
concentration in the aqueous phase, while the concentration in the
octanol phase was calculated from the initial amount of the cannabinoid
used and its measured concentration in the aqueous phase. Using this
approach, log P values were estimated as 6.2 ± 0.2 for CBN and
7.2 ± 0.2 for CBG. Due to the very low concentrations of CBD
and CBC in the aqueous phase, which fell below the LOQ of both methods,
we were unable to determine the log P for these two cannabinoids.
Nevertheless, based on the LOQ values, we can infer that the log P
values exceed 6.3 for CBD and 6.7 for CBC.

It is clear that
molecules with log P > 5 can be transported through the
mesenteric
lymph while molecules with log P < 5 cannot. However, even in molecules with log P > 5, the
F RL can still profoundly vary. Reason for a very low F RL (<10%) can be an insufficient amount of long-chain triglycerides
present in the drug formulation to stimulate the chylomicron assembly
like it was the case in halofantrine (log P 8.9) when administered
in an aqueous solution (F RL = 5.3%). A very high F RL (>90%), on the other hand,
is
usually seen in drugs with a prominent first-pass metabolism in the
liver, like testosterone undecanoate (log P 6.7, F RL =
98.5%). This high F RL does
not mean that no drug is absorbed into the portal vein and all the
drug is absorbed into the lymphatics, but rather that the drug absorbed
into the portal vein is (almost) completely metabolized during the
first pass in the liver and only lymphatically transported portion
reaches the systemic circulation. The mechanisms determining the F RL in the range ∼10–90% are not well understood.
Important here is the type and amount of lipids administered. Long-chain
triglycerides stimulate the lymphatic transport more than medium-chain
triglycerides and short-chain triglycerides. The F RL of
halofantrine was 70%, 29% and 15% when administered in a long, medium
and short-chain triglyceride oil, respectively. In this study, cannabinoids administered in a sunflower
oil, which consists mainly of long chain triglycerides containing
oleic and linoleic acid, reached a very high F RL (50–69%).
In the nanoemulsion, on the other hand, there were no standard triglycerides.
It consisted of polyethoxylated castor oil (Kolliphor EL), diethylene
glycol monoethyl ether, and propylene glycol monocaprylate. The lack
of long chain triglycerides is the most plausible explanation, why
the F RL here was lower (13–47%).

Table summarizes the basic physicochemical properties
and quantitative structural parameters of the four cannabinoids and Figure shows their relation
to lymphatic transport expressed as mean relative bioavailability
via lymph (F RL ). There was a highly significant negative
correlation between the smallest orthogonal molecular dimension and
F RL marked by the significantly nonzero slope in the linear
regression analysis ( p < 0.001). Topological polar
surface area did also negatively correlate (p = 0.04). Other physicochemical
properties (medium and largest orthogonal dimension, molecular volume,
rotatable bond count, log P and p K a ) did
not have a significant effect.

Relation between mean relative bioavailability
via lymph of CBD,
CBG, CBC, and CBN and their physicochemical properties and quantitative
structure parameters after administration in an oil solution. The
log P values for CBD and CBC shown in the graph are the minimal
values estimated by the measurement which are very close to the calculated
cLogP P values (6.3< vs 6.5 in CBD and 6.7< vs 6.9 in CBC).
F RL , relative bioavailability via lymph.

In our study, we compared F RL of four
highly lipophilic
cannabinoids administered in the very same formulation. Interestingly
the F RL did not correlate with the log P value. Based on
these results and based on the literature, it seems that log P of
5 represents a threshold beyond which a drug can be lymphatically
absorbed but other factors determine to which extent. Our QSAR analysis
on a limited number of compounds showed that the overall size of the
molecule seems not to be so important for increasing lymphatic uptake
as its planarity (F RL increases with decreasing smallest
orthogonal dimension, while the largest and medium orthogonal dimensions
and volume of the molecule are not significantly associated with F RL ). Another structural parameter that (negatively) correlates
with the F RL is the topological polar surface area.

Following oral administration, strongly lipophilic drugs access
the mesenteric lymph vessels via absorption across enterocytes. The substances are drawn into the cell organelles,
especially the smooth endoplasmic reticulum, where the formation of
chylomicrons takes place. The chylomicrons consist of a phospholipid
membrane, proteins and a lipophilic core consisting mainly of triglycerides,
in which the highly lipophilic substances, including drugs, are dissolved.
Chylomicrons are subsequently transported by the Golgi apparatus toward
the basal pole of the cell and secreted into the intercellular space.
They are too large to penetrate the wall of blood capillaries and,
therefore, enter the lymphatic capillaries, which have a more permeable
vessel wall. Thus, the interpretation of our observations may be that
higher planarity allows easier diffusion across phospholipid membranes
of the cell organelles where the chylomicrons are formed and across
the membranes of the chylomicrons themselves. The lower topological
polar surface area leads additionally to higher drug solubility in
long-chain triglycerides in the chylomicron lipophilic cores. To our
knowledge, this is the first report describing these structure–activity
relationships that are important for the design and development of
modern intestinal lymph-targeting drugs. Further studies are warranted
to confirm these preliminary conclusions.

This work shows on the
example of four cannabinoids CBD, CBG, CBC,
and CBN that for highly lipophilic active compounds, planarity of
the molecule and less surface polarity seem to be crucial structural
features that facilitate lymphatic transport and could therefore play
an important role in this absorption mechanism in the context of absolute
oral bioavailability of the drug. The overall size of the molecule
was of little significance for the extent of lymphatic absorption.
Compared to standard oil solution, administration of a nanoemulsion
devoid of standard triglycerides increased the absorption speed and
amount of cannabinoids absorbed directly into portal blood, bud did
not affect the overall bioavailability. Overall, intestinal lymphatic
transport plays a major role in the process of intestinal absorption
of the cannabinoids CBD, CBG, CBC, and CBN.