DOI: 10.1208/s12249-010-9455-3
TITLE: Stability Assessment of Injectable Castor Oil-Based Nano-sized Emulsion Containing Cationic Droplets Stabilized by Poloxamer–Chitosan Emulsifier Films

Research Article
Stability Assessment of Injectable Castor Oil-Based Nano-sized Emulsion
Containing Cationic Droplets Stabilized by Poloxamer– Chitosan
Emulsifier Films
S. Tamilvanan,1,2,3,4 B. Ajith Kumar,2 S. R. Senthilkumar,3 Raj Baskar,3 and T. Raja Sekharan3
Received 7 January 2010; accepted 27 April 2010; published online 22 May 2010
Abstract. The objectives of the present work were to prepare castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion
containing cationic droplets stabilized by poloxamer– chitosan emulgator ﬁlm and to assess the kinetic
stability of the prepared cationic emulsion after subjecting it to thermal processing and freeze– thaw
cycling. Presence of cryoprotectants (5%,w/w, sucrose +5%, w/w, sorbitol) improved the stability of
emulsions to droplet aggregation during freeze– thaw cycling. After storing the emulsion at 4°C, 25°C,
and 37°C over a period of up to 6 months, no signiﬁcant change was noted in mean diameter of the
dispersed oil droplets. However, the emulsion stored at the highest temperature did show a progressive
decrease in the pH and zeta potential values, whereas the emulsion kept at the lowest temperatures did
not. This indicates that at 37°C, free fatty acids were formed from the castor oil, and consequently, the
liberated free fatty acids were responsible for the reduction in the emulsion pH and zeta potential values.
Thus, the injectable castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion could be useful for incorporating various active
pharmaceutical ingredients that are in size from small molecular drugs to large macromolecules such as
oligonucleotides.
KEY WORDS:castor oil; chitosan; nano-sized emulsion; poloxamer; stability.
INTRODUCTION
An oil-in-water (o/w) nano-sized emulsion is a hetero-
genous dispersion of two immiscible liquids. According to the
second law of thermodynamics, the o/w nano-sized emulsion
is subjected to various instability processes like aggregation,
ﬂocculation, coalescence, Ostwald ripening, and hence even-
tual phase separation (1,2). Unlike microemulsions which are
thermodynamically stable and clear transparent liquid system,
macro (coarse)- and nano-sized emulsions are meta-stable
dispersions. However, the stability of the o/w macro (coarse)-
and nano-sized emulsions can substantially be improved with
the help of suitable emulsiﬁers or emulgators that are capable
of forming a mono- or multilayer coating ﬁlm around the
dispersed oil droplets in order to reduce interfacial tension and
to increase droplet– droplet repulsion (3). Depending on the
concentrations of these three components (oil– emulgators–
water) and the efﬁciency of the emulsiﬁcation equipments used
to reduce droplet size into a nano-sized and/or monodispersed
size range, the o/w nano-sized emulsion with improved stability
over the desired time span (in comparison to coarse emulsion)
can be obtained. The advantages of the nano-sized emulsion
system include: natural biodegradability, sub-micrometer
droplet size range, sterilizability, substantial drug solubilization
either at the innermost oil phase or at the o/w interface,
minimized side effects, and improved bioavailability (4). Due
to these advantages, the nano-sized emulsion is now recognized
as a promising drug delivery vehicle or carrier for parenteral (5)
and topical (ocular and percutaneous) (5,6) applications.
In general, the o/w type nano-sized emulsion (meant for
parenteral and topical applications) consists of 0.5– 20% of oil
or oil mixture, 0.1– 10% of an emulgator, 0.05– 5% of a nonionic
surfactant, and permitted amount of preservatives and osmotic
agent (5). The remaining proportion comprises an aqueous
component. To make anionic o/w nano-sized emulsion,
phospholipid-like Lipoid E80 either alone or in combination
with a water-soluble nonionic surfactant (poloxamer) and a
stabilizer-like oleic acid/cholic acid/deoxycholic acid or its
sodium salt was used as emulgator (3). In addition, a cationic
o/w nano-sized emulsion was prepared and stabilized by
forming a mixed emulgator ﬁlm comprising phospholipids,
poloxamer, and stearylamine/oleylamine at the o/w interface of
the oil droplets (4,7). Antioxidants such asα-tocopherol was
also included in most of the developed nano-sized emulsions in
order to prevent the oxidative degradation of phospholipid or
other emulsion components and thus the minimization of free
fatty acid formation in phospholipid-based emulsions following
autoclave sterilization and subsequent storage at stipulated
conditions. However, even with the addition of antioxidants,
1 International Medical University (IMU) SDN BHD, No. 126, Jalan
19/155B, Bukit Jalil, 57000, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
2 Arulmigu Kalasalingam College of Pharmacy, Krishnankoil, Tamil
Nadu State, India.
3 Sankaralingam Bhuvaneswari College of Pharmacy, Sivakasi, Tamil
Nadu State, India.
4 To whom correspondence should be addressed. (e-mail: tamilvanan2k
@yahoo.com)
AAPS PharmSciTech, Vol. 11, No. 2, June 2010 (
# 2010)
DOI: 10.1208/s12249-010-9455-3
1530-9932/10/0200-0904/0 # 2010 American Association of Pharmaceutical Scientists 904
the phospholipid-containing emulsion was prone to the
liberation of free fatty acids (from phospholipid components),
leading to the generation microclimate acidic pH in the
vicinity of the oil phase, oil– water interface, and water phase
of the emulsion (8,9). The microclimate pH thus generated
might be harmful to the emulsion-incorporated drug mole-
cules. Up to now, the adjustment of pH of the sterilized
emulsion by adding mild alkali is the only viable option to
prepare the emulsion with desired near neutral value
(pH ≈7). If free fatty acid was released or mild alkali
solution was added during the formulation of phospholipid-
stabilized emulsion, then incorporation of peptide or protein
into the emulsion might be questionable due to its possible
structural degradation/modi ﬁcation. In this context, it
becomes necessary to develop an emulsion without the
addition of phospholipid emulgator but still shows the
required kinetic stability for at least over months. Therefore,
castor oil, poloxamer– chitosan, and water are being selected
respectively as the model oil– emulgators– water components
to prepare the phospholipidless nano-sized emulsion.
The objectives of the present work were to prepare
castor oil-based nano-sized e mulsion containing cationic
droplets stabilized by poloxamer – chitosan emulgator ﬁlm
and to assess the kinetic stability of the prepared cationic
emulsion after subjecting it to thermal processing and freeze–
thaw cycling.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials
Castor oil andα-tocopherol were purchased from Fluka
(St. Louis, MO, USA). Chitosan (medium molecular weight;
deacetylation, 81%; viscosity of 1 wt.% solution in 1 wt.%
acetic acid, 286 cps; moisture, 4.6 wt.%; ash, 0.5 wt.%) was
obtained from Aldrich Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA).
Polyoxyethylene– poloxypropylene emulsiﬁer, poloxamer 188
(Pluronic F68), was furnished by BASF (Parsippany, NJ, USA).
All other chemicals were obtained commercially and used as
received.
Methods
Preparation of Nano-sized Emulsion
The phospholipidless and castor oil-based nano-sized
emulsion was prepared according to the method described
elsewhere [6]. In brief, 5 ml of castor oil and 0.05 ml ofα-
tocopherol were taken in a beaker and heated up to 70°C.
Two hundred ﬁfty milligrams of chitosan was dissolved in
5 ml of 0.05 M acetic acid and heated up to 70°C. Five
hundred milligrams of poloxamer 188 was dissolved in 50 ml
double distilled water containing 1.125 g glycerin in a
separate beaker and heated up to 70°C. Castor oil was added
to chitosan solution and then poloxamer– glycerin solution
was added and stirred well by means of a magnetic stirrer.
The resulting mixture was further heated to a temperature of
85°C. At this temperature, the obtained crude emulsion was
further mixed by a high shear mixer Polytron (Kinematica,
Luzerne, Switzerland) for 5 min and rapidly cooled to below
20°C. After cooling, the emulsion was homogenized using a
two-stage homogenizer valve assembly (Gaulin Homogenizer,
APV Gaulin, Hilversum, the Netherlands) at 9000 £/in.
2 for
5 min. The emulsion was then ﬁltered through a TE
membrane ﬁlter (Schuell and Schleicher, Dassel, Germany)
with a pore size of 0.45μm. The emulsion was packed under
nitrogen atmosphere in siliconized glass bottles and then
sterilized by steam autoclave at 121°C for 15 min. In total,
nine replicate emulsion samples were prepared using the
same ingredients with identical experimental conditions.
Zeta Potential, pH, and Viscosity Measurements
The zeta potential measurements were carried out using
the Malvern Zetasizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments, Ltd.,
Malvern, UK). The samples were diluted in double distilled
water and the measurements carried out in 10 mM NaCl
solution. Each sample was analyzed twice, each analysis
consisting of three replicates.
The pH was recorded at given time intervals using a pH
meter under different storage temperatures (MP220 pH
meter, Mettler Toledo, UK).
An Ubbelohde capillary viscometer (Schott, Hofheim,
Germany) was used to measure the viscosity of the emulsion
samples stored at three different storage temperatures over
time.
Particle Size Analysis
Mean droplet diameter was determined utilizing an ALV
Noninvasive Back Scattering High Performance Particle Sizer
(ALV-NIBS HPPS; Langen, Germany) at 25°C and using
water (refractive index, 1.332; viscosity, 0.894543) as the
dilution medium. A laser beam at 632-nm wavelength was
used. The sensitivity range was 0.5 nm– 5 mm. Apart from the
freshly prepared emulsion, the emulsions stored at 4±2°C, 25±
2°C and 37±2°C over up to 6 months were also followed up to
notice the change in mean droplet diameters. Values reported
were the mean droplet diameter of triplicate emulsion samples
stored at three different storage temperatures.
Stability Assessment
The pH, zeta potential, and droplet mean diameter were
monitored over up to 6 months’ time in the emulsions stored
at 4±2°C, 25±2°C, and 37±2°C. Three independent emulsion
samples for each storage conditions (3×3=9 emulsions) were
used. Possible phase separations were also assessed visually at
given time intervals. All other visible changes were recorded.
Accelerated Stability Test
Since sterilization for 15 min is a drastic operation, it
constitutes an accelerated stability test by itself. Creaming
and phase separation were then assessed visually after
sterilization. To evaluate the mechanical and physical resist-
ance, the emulsion should be subjected to an accelerated
mechanical stress. For this purpose, those emulsion bottles
which were stored at the already stated temperature con-
ditions for up to 6 months’ time were shaken at 100 strokes/
minute by an oscillatory agitation motion over 24 h at 25°C.
905Stability of Castor Oil-Based Nano-sized Emulsion
The droplet size was evaluated before and after this accel-
erated test.
Freeze–Thaw Cycling Stability
The freeze– thaw cycling stability of the emulsion in
presence of cryoprotectants (5%, w/w, sucrose +5%, w/w,
sorbitol) or in the absence of cryoprotectants was tested by
transferring the emulsion sample (5 ml) into plastic test tubes
and subsequently placing it in a−10°C freezer for 16 h and
then thawing in a water bath at 30°C for 2 h. This freeze– thaw
cycle was repeatedﬁve times, and its inﬂuence on emulsion
property (particle mean diameter) was measured after each
cycle.
Statistical Analysis
All the data were subjected to Student’s t test toﬁnd out
the statistical difference. The alpha (α) value for statistical
signiﬁcance is 0.05 (i.e.,p<0.05).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Excipient Selection
In the current investigation, a well-known combined
emulsiﬁcation and homogenization technique was used to
prepare castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion. Without the
addition of any phospholipid emulgator, the o/w nano-sized
emulsion was stabilized with the poloxamer– chitosan emul-
gator ﬁlm. In an arbitrary manner, the amount of castor oil,
poloxamer, and chitosan was chosen and kept respectively at
5 ml, 500 mg, and 250 mg to prepare the nine replicate
emulsion samples. In the medicalﬁeld, most of the nano-sized
emulsion was prepared utilizing the lower viscosity and
digestible oils, derived from the family of triglycerides, like
medium-chain triglycerides (MCT), soybean oil, sesame seed
oil, cottonseed oil, and saf ﬂower oil. In our preliminary
experiments, none of the aforementioned oils is able to
produce a stable emulsion system when poloxamer– chitosan
emulsiﬁer combination is used. Previous literature references
show that using corn oil as the oil phase and lecithin– chitosan
as the emulsiﬁer combination resulted in a stable emulsion
system (10,11). In addition, it was shown previously in the
phospholipid-stabilized emulsion that when using castor oil as
a single oil phase, the ﬁnal emulsion did not show stable
behavior in the long-term stability ( 12). But it was our
experience that in comparison to other oils, castor oil has
higher solubilization capacity to dissolve peptidic molecule
like cyclosporin A (9). Therefore, despite its higher viscosity,
castor oil alone was used in that previous study to prepare the
phospholipid-stabilized emulsion containing cyclosporin A.
Among the different natural and synthetic antioxidant
molecules that have been available (13), α-tocopherol was
the widely used antioxidant to prepare phospholipid-
stabilized nano-sized emulsion (6). The currently developed
(phospholipidless) emulsion was prepared based on castor oil,
stabilized with the poloxamer– chitosan emulgator ﬁlm, and
incorporated α-tocopherol and osmotic agent.
Particle Size and Emulsion Stabilization
Table I shows mean droplet diameter of the o/w nano-
sized emulsion. The mean droplet diameter was in the range
of 218– 250 nm and presented a monodispersed droplet size
distribution. As expected, the zeta potential of the developed
emulsion was also in positive unit due to the presence of
cationic polysaccharide (chitosan) at the mixed emulgator
ﬁlm. By comparing the positive zeta potential with mean
particle diameter at nanoscale level, it could be deduced that
chitosan molecules are localized at the oil– water interface and
intercalated between the nonionic poloxamer molecules.
Therefore, the combination of steric (by poloxamer) and
electrostatic (by cationic chitosan) repulsions was responsible
for the stabilization of dispersed castor oil droplets in the
phospholipidless o/w nano-sized emulsion. In addition, the
viscosity of the freshly prepared nano-sized emulsion for-
mulation was measured and found to be 1.5 cps.
Furthermore, the substantial stability shown by phos-
pholipidless and castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion even
after autoclave sterilization could reasonably be attributed to
the following explanation. Castor oil is known to contain
traces of free fatty acid (recinoleic acid), and even some
amount of fatty acid is likely to be liberated after autoclave
Table I. Effect of Storage Temperature and Time on the Mean Droplet Diameter and Zeta Potential Values of Castor Oil-Based Nano-sized
Emulsion
Storage time (months)
Physicochemical properties
Mean droplet diameter (nm) at different storage
temperature (°C)
Zeta potential (mV) at different storage
temperature (°C)
4 25 37 4 25 37
0 243 (±45) 243 (±48) 243 (±38) 41.4 (±1.24) 40.5 (±1.80) 47.3 (±1.91)
1 250 (±56) 238 (±50) 240 (±35) –––
3 235 (±45) 230 (±46) 228 (±46) –––
6 221 (±52) 221 (±40) 218 (±50) 37.8* (±0.89) 37.2* (±2.35) 30.6* (±1.37)
Three independent emulsion samples for each storage temperatures (3×3=9 emulsions) were used
– Not determined
Figures in parentheses indicate standard deviation (n=3)
*p<0.05
906 Tamilvanan et al.
sterilization. After interaction with positively charged chito-
san, the negatively charged fatty acids might acquire mild
emulsiﬁcation property (14). A similar effect of achievement
of emulsion kinetic stability through the same poloxamer–
chitosan emulgatorﬁlm was reported (14,15). However, these
authors used the oil mixture (castor oil and MCT) as an oil
phase of the emulsion rather than single oil (castor oil) alone
to prepare the o/w nano-sized emulsion. In this respect, our
developed emulsion differs signi ﬁcantly from the report
published previously by the other research groups.
Zeta Potential and Storage Conditions
The effect of storage temperature and time on the
droplet mean diameter and zeta potential values of castor
oil-based nano-sized emulsion was followed up to 6 months’
storage time at three differ ent temperature conditions
(Table I). It should be emphasized that in total, nine
independent emulsion samples were used to perform the
stability assessment. Up to 37°C, no signiﬁcant changes were
noted in mean droplet diameter. This indicates that over this
6-month period, castor oil- based nano-sized emulsion
remained physically stable. However, depending on the
storage temperatures, the zeta potential of the emulsion was
found to decrease. Immediately after the preparation of fresh
emulsion, the measured zeta potential was about + 41.4 mV
(Table I). The observed high positive zeta potential value was
sufﬁcient enough to prevent droplet coalescence upon
random collisions and even following autoclave sterilization
at elevated temperature. Keeping the emulsion at 37°C for up
to 6 months decreased the zeta potential to +30.6±1.37 mV.
The same emulsion stored at 25°C showed a lesser reduction
in the zeta potential (+37.2±2.35 mV). At 4°C, the zeta
potential of the emulsion was still found to be +37.8±0.89 mV.
Statistical analysis of these data revealed signiﬁcant differ-
ences (p<0.05; Table I). From this result, it appears that the
lowest temperature was more adequate for castor oil-based
nano-sized emulsion storage in terms of the emulsi ﬁed
particle’s surface charge. It should be emphasized that an
excessive shaking (100 strokes/minutes over 24 h) of the
emulsion was performed following the completion of
the storage conditions in order to verify the inﬂuence of the
storage conditions and mechanical stress on the droplet
diameter. No change in the mean droplet diameter was
observed, indicating the lack of any inﬂuence before and
after shaking of the emulsion.
Emulsion’s pH and Storage Conditions
The change in pH of the castor oil-based nano-sized
emulsion with time as a function of storage temperature is
depicted in Fig.1. The ﬁgure clearly shows the reduction of
the emulsion’s pH at 25°C and 37°C. It should be noted that
the initial pH of the emulsion was adjusted to 7.0 using a mild
acid before subjecting the emulsion to sterilization. However,
a progressive reduction in pH (1 to 4 units) of the emulsion
was noticed when stored at 37°C. The higher is the storage
temperature, the more is the liberation of free fatty acid
from castor oil, resulting in the auto-alteration of the
emulsion’s pH. At 4°C, it is interesting to see that the
initial reduction of pH started only after 2 months, and even
after its initiation, the progression in the reduction of pH
was also not so rapid in the following months as compared
to the higher storage temperatures. Thus, pH decreased only
by one single unit.
The combined implications of decreasing zeta potential
and pH within the studied storage conditions in the absence
of signi
ﬁcant droplet diameter increase could be explained on
the basis of the mixed poloxamer– chitosan emulgator ﬁlm
and the observed high positive zeta potential value. Chitosan
has a positive charge in acidic solutions due to the presence of
protonated amino groups along its backbone that have pKa
values between 6.3 and 7.0 (10,11). During emulsiﬁcation,
chitosan molecules are localized at the interface and interca-
lated between the nonionic surfactants. Hence, a mixed
interfacial ﬁlm comprising the poloxamer and chitosan
molecules was formed at the o/w interface which resulted in
an overall positive surface charge (zeta potential). The high
positive zeta potential value observed even after the higher
storage temperatures was sufﬁcient enough to prevent droplet
coalescence upon random collisions. Moreover, the combined
steric (by poloxamer) and electrostatic (by cationic chitosan)
Fig. 1. Inﬂuence of temperature over 6 months storage on the pH of
castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion (p<0.05)
Fig. 2. Dependence of mean particle diameter of the castor oil-based
nano-sized emulsion on number of freeze– thaw cycles (−10°C for
22 h/30°C for 2 h) in the absence and presence of cryoprotectants
( p<0.05)
907Stability of Castor Oil-Based Nano-sized Emulsion
repulsive forces were also operating onto the dispersed castor
oil droplets to maintain the stability of the produced nano-
sized particles. It should be added that the viscosity of the
emulsion stored at three different temperatures did not show
any signiﬁcant change (data not shown). This result further
substantiates the interfacial properties of the chitosan along
with poloxamer. Consequently, no signiﬁcant droplet diameter
increase was noted in the emulsion.
Freeze– Thaw Cycling Stability and Cryoprotectants
Preliminary experiments indicated that the emulsion was
unstable for freeze– thaw cycling in the absence of cryopro-
tectants. Dependence of mean particle diameter of the castor
oil-based nano-sized emulsion on the number of freeze– thaw
cycles (−10°C for 22 h/30°C for 2 h) in the absence and
presence of cryoprotectants is depicted in Fig. 2. In the
absence of cryoprotectants, the mean particle size of the
emulsion was found to increase progressively from 243 to
480 nm after ﬁve cycles. A number of physicochemical
mechanisms may be responsible for the extensive droplet
aggregation observed in the absence of cryoprotectants. First,
when the emulsion was placed in the freezer, some of its
water crystallized. This caused the dispersed oil droplets to
come into closer proximity because the oil droplets were
conﬁned to the nonfrozen regions remaining in the aqueous
phase (16). When there was no presence of sufﬁcient free
water to fully hydrate the oil droplet surfaces (17– 19), the
droplet– droplet interactions was forced closer together to
effect coalescence to occur. Second, ice crystallization led to
an increase in the ionic strength of the freeze-concentrated
non-frozen aqueous phase surrounding the emulsion droplets
(18). Third, it is possible that ice crystals formed during
freezing may have penetrated into the oil droplets and
disrupted their interfacial membranes. This allowed the oil
droplets more prone to coalescence between them. Fourth,
cooling may have caused some of the fat in the emulsion
droplets to crystallize promoting partial coalescence due to
penetration of a fat crystal from one droplet through the
membrane of another droplet (20,21).
In contrast, the presence of cryoprotectants improved
the stability of emulsions to droplet aggregation during
freeze– thaw cycling. For example, after one cycle, there was
no signiﬁcant change in the mean droplet diameter in the
castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion containing 5% sucrose
and 5% sorbitol (which remained the same around 240 nm),
and even after ﬁve cycles, the mean droplet diameter
increased to 260 nm only.
A number of mechanisms have been proposed to
account for the ability of cryoprotectants to improve the
stability of emulsions to aggregation during freeze – thaw
cycling. First, cryoprotectants increased the osmolyte concen-
tration in the aqueous phase, thereby reducing its crystal-
lization temperature. Subsequently, the total amount of ice
crystal formation was limited, and therefore, the volume of
non-frozen aqueous phase available to the oil droplets was
increased (18). Second, cryoprotectants formed hydrogen
bonds with emulsiﬁers adsorbed to droplet surfaces, thereby
reducing the tendency for interactions to occur between
droplet surfaces when the free water content was reduced
by ice crystallization (19).
CONCLUSIONS
The castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion was prepared
following the well-known emulsi ﬁcation–
homogenization
technique. To eliminate the lecithin or phospholipid (anionic)
components, the nonionic– cationic emulgatorﬁlm was used to
stabilize the o/w nano-sized emulsion. Regardless of the
storage conditions, the poloxamer– chitosan emulgator ﬁlm
was able to stabilize the castor oil-based nano-sized emulsion
in terms of mean droplet diameter. However, the emulsion’s
zeta potential and pH were altered with storage at all temper-
atures. The addition of cryoprotectants stabilized the emulsion
against droplet aggregation during freeze– thaw cycling. Fur-
ther works are undergoing in our lab to investigate the stability
of the castor oil-based emulsion following incorporation of
various active pharmaceutical ingredients that range in size
from small molecular drugs (acetazolamide, azithromycin, and
celecoxib) to large macromolecules such as oligonucleotides.
REFERENCES
1. Sarkar DK. Engineering of nanoemulsions for drug delivery.
Curr Drug Deliv. 2005;2(4):1– 14.
2. Capek I. Degradation of kinetically-stable o/w emulsions. Adv
Colloid Interface Sci. 2004;107:125– 55.
3. Grigoriev DO, Miller R. Mono- and multilayer covered drops as
carriers. Curr Opin Colloid Interface Sci. 2009;14:48– 59.
4. Tamilvanan S. Formulation of m ultifunctional oil-in-water
nanosized emulsions for active and passive targeting of drugs
to otherwise inaccessible internal organs of the human body. Int
J Pharm. 2009;381:62– 76.
5. Tamilvanan S. Oil-in-water nanosized emulsions: medical appli-
cations. In: Gad SC, editor. Pharmaceutical manufacturing
handbook, Chap. 7.4. New Jersey: Wiley; 2008. p. 1329– 68.
6. Tamilvanan S, Benita S. The potential of lipid emulsion for
ocular delivery of lipophilic drugs. Eur J Pharm Biopharm.
2004;58:357– 68.
7. Korner D, Benita S, Albrecht G, Baszkin A. Surface properties of
mixed phospholipid– stearylamine monolayers and their interaction
with a nonionic surfactant (poloxamer). Colloids Surf. 1994;3:101– 9.
8. Rabinovich-Guilatt L, Couvreur P, Lambert G, Goldstein D,
Benita S, Dubernet G. Extensive surface studies help to analyse
zeta potential data: the case of cationic emulsions. Chem Phys
Lipids. 2004;131:1– 13.
9. Tamilvanan S, Khoury K, Gilhar D, Benita S. Ocular delivery of
cyclosporin A. I. Design and characterization of cyclosporin A-
loaded positively-charged submicron emulsion. STP Pharma Sci.
2001;11:421– 6.
10. Ogawa S, Decker EA, McClements DJ. Inﬂuence of environ-
mental conditions on the stability of oil in water emulsions
containing droplets stabilized by lecithin– chitosan membranes. J
Agric Food Chem. 2003;51(18):5522– 7.
11. Ogawa S, Decker EA, McClements DJ. Production and charac-
terization of o/w emulsions containing cationic droplets stabilized
by lecithin– chitosan membranes. J Agric Food Chem. 2003;51
(9):2806– 12.
12. Jumaa M. Ph.D thesis, Christian Albrecht University for Kiel,
Kiel, Germany; 1999.
13. Blokhina O, Virolainen E, Fagerstedt KV . Antioxidants, oxida-
tive damage and oxygen deprivation stress: a review. Ann Bot.
2003;91:179– 94.
14. Jumaa M, Müller BW. Physicochemical properties of chitosan–
lipid emulsions and their stability during the autoclaving process.
Int J Pharm. 1999;183:175– 84.
15. Calvo P, Remuñá-López C, Vila-Jato JL, Alonso MJ. Develop-
ment of positively charged colloidal drug carriers: chitosan-
coated polyester nanocapsules and submicro-emulsions. Coll
Polym Sci. 1997;275:46– 53.
16. Saito H, Kawagishi A, Tanaka M, Tanimoto T, Okada S,
Komatsu H, et al. Coalescence of lipid emulsions in ﬂoating
908 Tamilvanan et al.
and freeze-thawing processes: examination of the coalescence
transition state theory. J Colloid Interface Sci. 1999;219:129– 34.
17. Ausborn M, Schreier H, Brezesinski G, Fabian H, Meyer HW,
Nuhn P. The protective effect of free and membrane bound
cryoprotectants during freezing and freeze-drying of liposomes. J
Control Release. 1994;30:105– 16.
18. Komatsu H, Okada S, Handa T. Suppressive effects of salts on
droplet coalescence in a commercially available fat emulsion
during freezing for storage. J Pharm Sci. 1997;86:497– 502.
19. Strauss G, Hauser H. Stabilization of lipid bilayer vesicles by
sucrose during freezing. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 1986;83:2422– 6.
20. Vanapalli SA, Palanuwech J, Coupland JN. Stability of emulsions
to dispersed phase crystallization: effect of oil type, dispersed
phase volume fraction, and cooling rate. Colloid Surf A.
2002;204:227– 37.
21. Harada T, Yokomizo K. Demulsiﬁcation of oil-in-water emulsion
under freezing conditions: effect of crystal structure modiﬁer. J
Am Oil Chem Soc. 2000;77:859– 63.
909Stability of Castor Oil-Based Nano-sized Emulsion